block production/Technical features (#207)
moondance-labs/tanssi-docs: learn/tanssi/appchain-services/block-production.md

The protocol also tackles the security front by allowing appchains to select and connect to external security providers (like [Symbiotic](/learn/tanssi/external-security-providers/symbiotic/){target=\_blank}), ensuring Ethereum-grade security right from the start.

This article covers the necessary aspects to consider when building and deploying your own modular blockchain, along with the most relevant technical aspects of the Tanssi protocol.

## Block Production as a Service {: #block-production-as-a-service }

The Tanssi protocol provides block production as a service, orchestrating a decentralized and trustless set of sequencers, ensuring the appchains' liveness. To do so, the protocol bridges both ends:

- **Node operators** - who run sequencers, offering their block production services to get rewards
- **Appchains** - which require transactions to be executed and included in blocks, keeping the network's liveness

> 

Reviewer: This part is a bit confusing. "To do so, the protocol bridges both ends" I'm unsure how this relates to the list below. It feels a bit repetitive tho as it is a bit the same but in a list.

Maybe just skip the bullet list and go to the next paragraph?

Author: It wasn't very clear, indeed. I changed it so both bridged ends are the actors node operators and develoeprs. wdyt?

The protocol assigns a subset of sequencers to provide services to each appchain, rotating them after a period of time. The sequencers can serve any appchain, regardless of the custom logic they implement. On the other hand, appchains deployed through Tanssi can customize their runtime as much as they need to fit their use case and upgrade the logic at any moment in a forkless fashion without worrying about the sequencer's setup.

The following diagram illustrates how Tanssi assigns two sequencers to each active appchains, selecting them from a decentralized set of sequencers.

```mermaid

> flowchart LR
>     subgraph appchain1 [Appchain 1]
>     s1bis[Sequencer 1]
>     s2bis[Sequencer 2]
>     end
>     subgraph appchain2 [Appchain 2]
>     s3bis[Sequencer 3]
>     s4bis[Sequencer 4]
>     end
>     Tanssi[
>         Tanssi Network
>         Orchestrator
>     ]
>     subgraph sequencers [Sequencers Pool]
>     direction RL
>     s1[Sequencer 1]
>     s2[Sequencer 2]
>     s3[Sequencer 3]
>     s4[Sequencer 4]
>     sn[Sequencer N]
>     end
>     sequencers-- Managed by -->Tanssi
>     Tanssi-- Assigns Sequencers -->appchain1
>     Tanssi-- Assigns Sequencers -->appchain2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
flowchart TB
    subgraph appchain1 [Appchain 1]
        s1bis[Sequencer 1]
        s2bis[Sequencer 2]
    end

    subgraph appchain2 [Appchain 2]
        s3bis[Sequencer 3]
        s4bis[Sequencer 4]
    end

    Tanssi[Tanssi Network<br/>Orchestrator]

    subgraph sequencers [Sequencers Pool]
        direction LR
        s1[Sequencer 1]
        s2[Sequencer 2]
        s3[Sequencer 3]
        s4[Sequencer 4]
        sn[Sequencer N]

        s1 --- s2 --- s3 --- s4 --- sn
    end

    sequencers -- Managed by --> Tanssi
    Tanssi -- Assigns Sequencers --> appchain1
    Tanssi -- Assigns Sequencers --> appchain2
```

Reviewer: Just mainly because it renders a bit too small this way

Author: Much better!

```

### Block Producer Selection Process {: #block-producer-selection-process}

At any given time, all Tanssi appchains require a certain number of sequencers, depending on the number of active appchains and the current block production configuration set in Tanssi. The configuration sets the maximum number of total sequencers in the set and the number of sequencers each Appchain has to have assigned.

> === "Dancelight"

Reviewer: Do we already have a section that explains what Dancelight is? Is a bit confusing because the paragraph before does not have a link to something around networks

Author: No, as we don't have a dancebox section. This is the first time this name appears, and once we get confirmation that this is the official name and Dancebox is deprecated, we should replace dancebox everywhere (including the networks article in the builders section)

Reviewer: Ok lets clear this out before resolving the comment

Author: We'll stick with Dancebox

    |          Variable           |                                       Value                                        |
    |:---------------------------:|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------:|
    |    Max. # of Sequencers     |     {{ networks.dancebox.block_producers.configuration.max_block_producers }}      |
    | # of Sequencers (Appchains) | {{ networks.dancebox.block_producers.configuration.block_producer_per_container }} |

> Once the required number of block producers for a given session is known, Tanssi uses two mechanisms to decide the actual set of sequencers that will be distributed among all networks. The first mechanism is through the *Invunerables* module, which sets a list of fixed sequencers prioritized by the protocol and serves as a way to ensure block production stability in certain scenarios like TestNets. The second mechanism is through the [Tanssi staking module](/learn/tanssi/network-features/staking/){target=\_blank}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the required number of block producers for a given session is known, Tanssi uses two mechanisms to decide the set of sequencers distributed among all networks. 

The first mechanism is through the *Invunerables* module, which sets a list of fixed sequencers prioritized by the protocol and ensures block production stability in certain scenarios, such as TestNets. 
```

Reviewer: I think it might be good to set the Invunerables as  a Network Feature and briefly explain how it works. This is what allows Tanssi to always have a minimum set of block producers

> The Tanssi staking module helps create a decentralized set of sequencers for all Tanssi appchains by providing the protocol with a sorted list of sequencers by staked amount. Tanssi appends the sorted list by stake of sequencers to the invulnerable ones (if any), then takes from the list only the exact amount of sequencers needed, starting from the top, leaving out of the next session those sequencers that have less staked value, to finally begin the sequencer assignation process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second mechanism is through the [Tanssi staking module](/learn/tanssi/network-features/staking/){target=\_blank}. The module helps create a decentralized set of sequencers for all Tanssi appchains by providing the protocol with a sorted list of sequencers by staked amount. Tanssi appends the sorted list by stake of sequencers to the invulnerable ones (if any), then takes from the list only the exact amount of sequencers needed, starting from the top, leaving out of the next session those sequencers that have less staked value, to finally begin the sequencer assignation process.
```

When a new session starts, the Tanssi protocol will put the queued assignment into effect. Sequencers will automatically change and start producing blocks in the new Tanssi appchain they've been assigned to while discarding the chain state from the previous assignment. Tanssi will also calculate the new assignment, considering changes in Tanssi appchains that might have been activated or deactivated and block producers that might have been added or removed from the pool or changed the total staked value. This new assignment will be queued for the next session.

![Sessions](/images/learn/tanssi/technical/technical-2.webp)

### The Role of the Tanssi Network {: #tanssi-newtwork }

As previously discussed, the Tanssi protocol assigns sequencers to the Tanssi appchains, and the result of this assignment is stored within the chain state.  Besides running the appchain node, the sequencers also run the Tanssi one. Hence, by accessing the data stored in the finalized blocks of the Tanssi network, they can learn their assignation for the session, and the Tanssi appchains can confirm that a certain group of sequencers have been assigned to them. 

> As the Tanssi appchains produce blocks, those blocks need to be validated and finalized by an external security provider. Once an operator verifies a block, a small proof of validity is produced and stored in Tanssi, keeping track of the the proofs for each block of each chain. This small representation of the proof of validity is called [candidate receipt](https://polkadot.network/blog/the-path-of-a-parachain-block#candidate-receipts){target=\_blank} and is composed of a set of values, including the state root, which can be used to verify state proofs.

Reviewer: I think in the future we should link this to a section in our own docs that is like a glossary

Author: Agreed. I created a ticket to address this in the future

Finally, Tanssi can verify that the author of an appchain block was the expected one and reward accordingly.

The following diagram shows a simplified model of the data Tanssi stores in its internal state. For every active appchain (in this example, two), Tanssi stores the assigned sequencers, which are the only ones authorized to produce blocks on the appchain's behalf, proof of validity (candidate receipts) extended by the security provider's operators, the latest state root, and the latest block producer. 

```mermaid
classDiagram

    class tanssi["Tanssi State"] {
        Appchains Current Sequencer Assignment
        Appchains Next Session's Sequencer Assignment
    }

    class appchain1["Appchain 1"] {
        Current Sequencers assigned
        Last Block's Proof of Validity
        Latest State Root
        Latest Block Producer
    }

    class appchain2["Appchain 2"] {
        Current Sequencers assigned
        Last Block's Proof of Validity
        Latest State Root
        Latest Block Producer
    }

    tanssi-->appchain1

>     tanssi-->appchain2

Reviewer: I'm not super fond of this Diagram tbh - Maybe we can check with @dawnkelly09 or someone else on how to improve it?

Once the block is filled with appchain transactions, it will be proposed as a candidate and handed over to the Tanssi chain, where the security provider's operators will ensure that the included state proofs match the state proofs from the latest state of Tanssi (preventing unauthorized block production) and that the transactions produced valid state transitions. Having verified the work of the sequencer, the operators will finalize the proposed block, including its candidate receipt in a Tanssi network block.

```mermaid
classDiagram

    note for tanssi "The sequencer reads the Tanssi State"

    class tanssi["Appchain Block"] {
        Appchain's Current Sequencers Assignment
        Tanssi's State Root
        Sequencer operator's signature
        Appchain Transactions()
    }
```

> ## Costs to Cover  {: #costs-to-cover }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Block Production Fees  {: #block-production-fees }
```

As presented in the [Introduction](#introduction), Tanssi is an infrastructure protocol that addresses the complexities and high costs associated with setting up and maintaining blockchain infrastructure, streamlining the deployment of appchains. This protocol brings benefits for both participants:

- Appchains - teams can focus on the core logic of their product, the UX, and the UI without dealing with the challenges of infrastructure bootstrapping and its management

> - Sequencers - bearing with the responsibility of keeping their hardware and software configuration in optimal conditions, they are incentivized to execute transactions and produce blocks on behalf of the Tanssi appchains

Reviewer: Is this formatting right?

Author: Missing bold markup!

The following diagram shows a simplified model of the data Tanssi stores in its internal state. For every active appchain (in this example, two), Tanssi stores the assigned sequencers, which are the only ones authorized to produce blocks on the appchain's behalf, proof of validity (candidate receipts) extended by the security provider's operators, the latest state root, and the latest block producer. 

```mermaid
flowchart TB

    subgraph general["Orchestration Info"]
        direction TB
        assignment1["Appchains Current Sequencer Assignment"]
        assignment2["Appchains Next Session's Sequencer Assignment"] 
    end
    subgraph appchain1["Appchain 1"]
        direction LR
        appchain11["Current Sequencers assigned"]
        appchain12["Last Block's Proof of Validity"]
        appchain13["Latest State Root"]
        appchain14["Latest Block Producer"]
    end
    subgraph appchain2["Appchain 2"]
        appchain21["Current Sequencers assigned"]
        appchain22["Last Block's Proof of Validity"]
        appchain23["Latest State Root"]
        appchain24["Latest Block Producer"]
    end

    general --> appchain1
    general --> appchain2

> 

Author: Reverting to the previous diagrams we had, they were more expressive

Leveraging this ability to access the states, the current sequencer with the authority to produce a block will read the state of the latest block produced in the Tanssi chain. It will proceed to include this state in the block of the appchain, the current set of sequencers assigned to the appchain, and its public signature, allowing Tanssi to know who produced the block and reward the node operator.

Once the block is filled with appchain transactions, it will be proposed as a candidate and handed over to the Tanssi chain, where the security provider's operators will ensure that the included state proofs match the state proofs from the latest state of Tanssi (preventing unauthorized block production) and that the transactions produced valid state transitions. Having verified the work of the sequencer, the operators will finalize the proposed block, including its candidate receipt in a Tanssi network block.

```mermaid
classDiagram

    note for tanssi "The sequencer reads the Tanssi State"

    class tanssi["Appchain Block"] {
        Appchain's Current Sequencers Assignment
        Tanssi's State Root
        Sequencer operator's signature
        Appchain Transactions()

>     }

Author: Done, but It will not be valid for polkadot, since architecturally speaking both security approaches are different.
In the future we could include sections for how it works on each security provider

When a new session starts, the Tanssi protocol will put the queued assignment into effect. Sequencers will automatically change and start producing blocks in the new Tanssi appchain they've been assigned to while discarding the chain state from the previous assignment. Tanssi will also calculate the new assignment, considering changes in Tanssi appchains that might have been activated or deactivated and block producers that might have been added or removed from the pool or changed the total staked value. This new assignment will be queued for the next session.

> ![Sessions](/images/learn/tanssi/appchain-services/block-production/block-production-1.webp)

Reviewer: The problem with his image is that it has the relay chain, which says Tanssi appchains, right?

Author: No problems with this image. In fact, it didn't change, it was just renamed for consistency with the new structure

Reviewer: Ahhhhh I had the wrong image. looks great!

Once the block is filled with appchain transactions, it will be proposed as a candidate and handed over to the Tanssi chain, where the security provider's operators will ensure that the included state proofs match the state proofs from the latest state of Tanssi (preventing unauthorized block production) and that the transactions produced valid state transitions. Having verified the work of the sequencer, the operators will finalize the proposed block, including its candidate receipt in a Tanssi network block.

> ![Tanssi-powered network block](/images/learn/tanssi/appchain-services/block-production/block-production-3.webp)

Reviewer: This image has Polkadot logo etc. I think just doing minor edits will be an easy win

Author: Wait a sec, maybe you are seeing the outdated version. This file looks like this:
<img width="1029" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bf5bbb96-1e17-4432-b0b9-46129586e279" />

Reviewer: 😬
